Where were you born? Born in Liverpool, 1939, just before the war, on the January before the war.
Do you know Bootle? Yes, I mean that's one of the things that I suppose Thomas and I got on so well.
He was a Bootle lad and I was a Liverpool lad, although he was much more of a scouser than I was in a sense.
I grew up in the posh part of Liverpool, they would say, in Mosley Hill.
My parents were doctors. My father was a GP in Mosley Hill and Allerton for maybe 30 years before he retired with ill health.
So I came from a medical family. They were Glasgow graduates and came to Liverpool.
So yes, Liverpool is my hometown. I did a degree in civil engineering at the university there.
And my first job was with Robert McAlpine. Met the personnel officer and he says, when do you want to start?
I said, oh well, I'll be there in a holiday, September will be alright. Fine, he said.
And he sent me off to Newport, South Wales, where they were part of a huge construction team building the Clanwerne Steelworks.
Richard Thomas and Baldwin, as it was in those days. It was a massive, massive thing.
And I spent most of the time setting out the concrete bases for the huge steel rolling mills and the steelmaking plants.
And the whole lot was piled. They had to raise the level of the ground there by about six feet.
It was all marshlands. And there'll be lorries coming down from the Welsh valleys day and night with shale and gravel and stuff to raise the level to make it possible to put piling in.
And he said that you could run a road from Newport to London with the amount of stuff that they brought down from the valleys. Huge amount.
Anyway, I was there in September and I left, I think that was in 1960 after I graduated.
That's in 1960. And then stayed there until, I think it was July-ish, 1962.
And the job was coming to the inclusion and I was transferred as part of my career development to go into the design office in Carpines having spent my first 18 months out on site, which is a wonderful experience for me.
I learnt a lot about the world and life and so on.
And being part of a team as well, I suppose.
Well, yes. The Chippies as we used to call them, the Labourers. We're all part of a team and I always thought we were all equally important.
I couldn't get on with my job until they did theirs and they couldn't get on with the job until I had done mine as the engineer.
And then I moved up to Cheshire, to Nutsford, to the Carpines base there with the nuclear power group and we were designing nuclear power stations.
My first job was with the Dungeness A, as it's now called, down at Lyd in Kent.
And we once flew a few of us down from Manchester to the Lyd airport to see how the construction was going.
And then Dungeness moved on to the old Beyond 7 one. That was the first of the advanced gas cool reactors, AGR, a pre-stressed concrete pressure vessel.
And I remember designing a pump house for that.
And so I was based in Nutsford, but that was the very cold winds of 62, 63.
And I was in Diggs in Nutsford with a little lady and another bloke.
And it was freezing cold. I used to wear my duffle coat in bed at night. No double glazer or anything like that, a little old cottage.
Well, my home was still in Liverpool and I decided that having bought my little mini car in Newport, S69BAX, little white cream mini,
and so I decided I would see if I could travel from Liverpool each day to Nutsford.
And soon I found there were two other fellows also travelling from Liverpool.
We used to meet up and take turns in driving from Liverpool to Nutsford each day.
How long did that take?
About three quarters to an hour.
Oh, that's not too bad.
The new bridge, well, it's now the old bridge, of course, was opened, you see. That was the arch bridge.
You know they've opened a new bridge, the gateway, which is a suspension bridge.
Well, so you could do it and travelling through the countryside.
And so I lived at home again and that's why I think back of the church.
And that's all part of the story.
Going back to the first arriving in Newport, I was brought up in the Presbyterian Church of England Church in Liverpool
when I was baptised and grew up, confirmed and became a member.
And so, you know, church was at least twice a Sunday, church in the morning, Sunday school in the afternoon.
And in those days, being very Scottish in the family, from a young age I used to wear the kilt every Sunday.
That was my Sunday best.
And once I came to Newport, I thought I'd look out for a Presbyterian Church.
And catching a bus from Newport town out to where we were living in the McAlpine area,
out to where we were living in the McAlpine's hostels at Pie Corner,
was a huge accommodation place for everybody there.
You know, sort of temporary accommodation hut after hut after hut.
Not huts, what do you call them, I don't know.
Anyway, you had your own room and there were showers and the canteen and things like that.
You were fed and watered.
And on the road coming out of Newport to Pie Corner, along Corporation Road, I saw this sign,
Welsh Presbyterian Church.
I thought, well, it was English speaking, I think, which is important.
So I think probably the following Sunday or so, I must have got a lift or a bus in
and went to the evening service on the Sunday.
I was a bit sort of non-plus because it was all ladies doing everything.
I thought it was a bit strange, never had ladies doing everything in the church before.
See, you're going back a long time when ladies didn't do much in the church on a Sunday.
Anyway, they were very warm and welcoming and so I went again the following Sunday
and met Cyril Somers and that's where it all started.
And Brian says I did, or Valerie says I did quite a lot in the church,
I can't remember what else I did.
Whether it was a choir or not, I used to be in the choir in the church in Liverpool,
so I always loved singing, still do.
So whether they had a choir, I can't remember.
But I wouldn't have had time to do much else, you see,
because I used to work five and a half days a week.
Saturday was a normal day and then there was overtime, Saturday afternoons and Sundays as well,
which is quite important because I was saving up for a car, you see.
And eventually I was able to, the bank manager, my father knew a bank manager,
took out an insurance policy and that was the security for getting a loan for a to-buy car.
Anyway, so there we were and I had a very warm welcome.
Met the Selby family, the Martin family, all sorts of people.
It was a lovely community group, very family orientated, I think.
And that was when the old church was still standing?
Oh, yes, this is 1960, 1961 to 1962.
So eventually I was moving away back up to Nubsford, you see,
said my farewells and I sort of must have kept in touch,
Christmas cards or something with Syl and Dorothy, wasn't it?
Dorothy.
Dorothy, very bubbly character she was.
I can still hear her laugh or chuckle with it.
She was lovely.
And then things started to happen.
When I was in Nubsford and living back at home, joined up with the church again,
I was invited to join the old FLY, the Fellish for Youth, the youth group,
which met on a Sunday night.
Of course, when I went to, I should have said that, to Newport,
I suppose I did stand out because I went to my Sunday best.
I wore my kilt on a Sunday.
Well, not many Scotsmen wear a kilt in Newport, I'll tell you.
And maybe they thought, here's this funny Scotsman who comes to church
and they're killed on a Sunday in a Welsh Presbyterian church.
So there you are.
Perhaps they thought me a bit different, obviously, but I'm a tall fellow.
I'm sort of six foot three in those days as well as I stood out.
But that was part of me.
Anyway, having joined up in the church in Liverpool again, in Alersan,
I was asked one time to help out an Anglican church not far away,
leading their young people on a weekend conference.
About four or five of us went along just to assist.
At the end of this conference, we were asked,
will somebody give a testimony about their faith?
We all looked at each other and they looked at me and said,
Angus, you can do it.
I thought, well, help, having done it in my life before.
You know, not just what do you believe, why do you believe it, isn't it?
And so I can't remember what I said, but I struggled through.
And that was, it must have been in October.
And in the October, the minister of the church, Hal Springbott,
gave the annual notice about the need for ministers to train at Westminster College.
And if anybody wants ever to think about it, have a talk with me.
Well, I was sitting in the choir stalls and a little voice seemed to say to me,
how about you, Angus?
And that little thought wouldn't go away.
So I had a word with my minister and said, what's involved?
I don't know whether I want to do this or what's involved.
And he told me, and come November,
the youth group were taking the evening service and had to plan it
and who's going to do the talk or the sermon?
Who he looked at and I said, well, I'll have a go.
And I thought as a test that if I could do this, then maybe that's not saying something to me.
Because by this time I had sort of said, well, God, if my life is yours, what do you want me to do?
And so I did it and the minister had looked at it beforehand, made one or two suggestions,
and I got through it, giving my first sermon in my kilt, of course,
which I have done one since.
And it all happened.
So I felt, yeah, OK.
So then I, it was a step of faith.
If God wants me to be a minister, then the doors will open.
If he doesn't, the doors won't open, will they?
That's what a step of faith is about.
You've got to go for it and see what happens.
And I went for interviews and got past those, had to go to London, got past those.
And lo and behold, this was 1963 by now,
I found myself doing an entrance exam in Westminster College, and a week later I found out I'd passed.
Now, so that's when my training started in Cambridge for three years.
Meanwhile, back in Liverpool, having met up with a youth group, there was a young lady called Althea Jones,
whom I used to know in the Sunday school days when she'd been about five or six,
and I'd be three years old, eight or nine, something like that.
She had long black hair and pigtails.
I had two friends, Jean and Joan.
And eventually she invited me to join the FOI when I came back to Liverpool.
And within a year or so we sort of had met,
and obviously been on a few outings with young people, and we fell in love.
And that's the history.
We had a golden wedding maybe three years ago.
It is 53 years this year.
Congratulations.
And so it was 1963.
I must have had some sort of letter from Cyril Somers saying,
The problem was the church building, the tower was subsiding, I think it was.
The nations were giving way and it was going to have to be demolished.
And they were planning to have an international voluntary work camp to start a rebuild scheme,
but they needed to prepare stuff, the ground works for it.
Would I possibly be able to come and be work leader, if you like, with my engineering experience?
And I said, Well, if this is what God wants me to do, I'll have a go.
And I went to the senior engineer working in Nutsford and Central.
Is it possible to be away for a month doing this project for a church in Newport where we used to work with McAlpine's then?
And he said, Yes, but it would be unpaid leave.
No, you can't get paid for being away for a month.
You're used up on your holiday.
I came down and I was fed and watered for a month.
I think I stayed in the cell, I think so.
This time, Alfie and I were engaged and she came down one weekend and met Cyril and Dorothy and the family.
It was only just for a weekend.
We can't remember if we got any photographs because we didn't do many in those days.
I've got a few of the steelworks I took, but they're all transparencies anyway.
Oh, yeah, they'll be quite difficult to view.
Where they are now, I've no idea.
Oh, so that's interesting because I got the impression that you were at the time working on the Flanwerne Steelworks.
No, no, I've gone by them.
No, you've not been up there at all.
Sir Robert McAlpine, yes.
They're still doing very good firms.
Yes, they are.
In fact, they're doing a big job in Cardiff for the new central hub, is it, for the assembly.
I looked up their website yesterday.
Oh, they did the Olympic Park.
Within budget and on time.
They all did the arse on the Emirates Stadium.
It's a well-known firm.
So I was pleased.
When I left them, I gave my notice and I was going to train for college.
I asked the old manager, went, a nice sort of memo said,
we think we could have made you into a good engineer.
But he was interesting because when he realised what I was doing to train for the church,
she said, well, and he was a crusader leader.
Are there crusaders?
Not really.
Well, it's work amongst young people.
It's basic.
No, it's not an Anglican group, but it's a very evangelical group working with young people.
I don't know how well it's going these days now, but it was quite a strong group in gospel when it was there.
So there we are.
We came down and worked for a month and it was amazing.
I don't really have a record of all the people who came from around the world.
Oh, yes, we have and we've tried to contact them through various means.
The only people that we know...
They were from the United States, India.
I think there's a Hebrew girl from Israel.
There was Swiss, Swedish, I think there was English and Welsh.
I think it was a Scots girl and incredible.
I think we'd gather at eight o'clock in the morning, prayers outdoors because there's nowhere to stay for that.
And they worked from eight o'clock till about midday, have lunch somewhere,
and then they have the afternoon off to go and visit and so on.
At that time I was of going to retire and have to read in preparation for my entrance exam at Westminster College in Cambridge,
trying to read philosophy of religion.
I couldn't make head or tail of it.
I was an engineer, you know, this is all new to me, different language.
At any point did you think, am I really doing the right thing or you didn't feel...
No, you just had this faith that this is the right path for you.
Well, if God wanted me to do it, he would open the doors.
But what I found out for the entrance exam, I had to do New Testament Greek.
That sort of... I mean, the minister helped me a lot.
And because I was an engineer, you do a lot of maths.
And so I knew the Greek alphabet from alpha to omega because it's all in substitution, isn't it, maths?
X, Y, Z, and alpha to omega.
And I'd done that in school, so the grammar of New Testament Greek and Latin are very, very similar.
So it wasn't too hard to pick up, it's just the vocabulary and all the verbs and nouns.
So I passed it somehow, but then I also had to do Hebrew at college, and that really was a struggle.
You spend hours getting very little away.
And for the first year I sort of floundered because to move from a scientific engineering background
into a theological, philosophical, language-orientated and all that was really strange.
And it took me a year to begin to fit things together, as well as a lot of Bible studies.
And history, I hadn't done history. I failed my history exam the first year
because I thought, history, we'll just read it and it'll all come back to you. No, it doesn't.
So my first summer holidays I had to work hard.
Meantime, my parents had moved up to Scotland, so I had no base in Liverpool.
And my Alfea parents took me in as a lodger.
So I lived with my fiancé for two years in those days.
Very risky, isn't it?
And while you were at college, you weren't permitted to get married, you see.
That was the rule at the time.
But by two years later, the General Assembly, the Presbyterian Church, changed the rules.
You get married while you're in study with the permission of your minister,
the principal of the college and the moderator of the General Assembly.
Of course you can, yes.
The principal said, yes, Alan McLeod is a lovely Liverpool man.
And the moderator came to see me and interview me quite so seriously.
Do I really understand what you're doing?
Well, I was 26 by this time.
So we got married in 1965 now.
I finished the course at Cambridge in 1966.
So, meantime, back in Newport, all these wonderful young people,
it wasn't all plain sailing because, you know, there were group dynamics.
How many were on it? About 15, 20?
Something like that. I've got a list of them.
Yeah, something like that.
Well, you know, jelling that together of all different backgrounds and cultures was quite something.
And, you know, hats off when you look back to Cyril and Dorothy for helping it happen the way it did.
And what I'll never, you know, the poor things had to be scraping the mortar off bricks, cleaning bricks.
That was our major job.
So dirty and hard.
And that was almost soul-destroying.
I think the weather for that month was quite good somehow looking back.
Not too bad. There were some lovely mornings.
But my sort of wonderful memory, which never left me and influenced my thinking,
that on the very last morning, Cyril arranged for a sharing of communion outside in the open air,
in the round, with all these young people.
And they all took part, as far as I can remember, the Roman Catholics and even this Israeli girl who was, you know,
Hebrew, all took part in the sharing the bread and the wine.
And, you know, that image has never left me that this is how the church and the world should be,
sharing together in harmony and peace and in love for one another.
And if you can do it here, why can't they do it elsewhere?
And I've always been so sort of disappointed in the way people look back at this is our tradition,
and we can't possibly change this, do that.
And oh, so far from how I see what Jesus wanted things to be.
But that for me was an insight which has never left me all my life in church life, the ecumenical scene.